# Build systems
- [Make](#Make)
- [Kbuild](#Kbuild)
- [CMake](#CMake)
- [ESP-IDF](#ESP-IDF)
## Make
### Definitions
- **Target** - a node in the dependency graph. Usually a file generated by commands or a label for commands to execute (phony target).
- **Dependencies** - files or other targets that the current target depends on. Before updating a target, make recursively processes its dependencies
and then decides whether the target should be rebuilt by comparing timestamps: 
```
for dependency D:
    if D has build rule:
        recursively update(D)
    else:
        treat D as leaf filesystem file

THEN after all dependencies processed:
compare timestamps for current target
```
- **Commands/Recipes** - shell commands to execute by make. If on the next line after target/dependencies, should be started with **tab**.
- **Rule** - individual target + dependencies + commands  

Rule example:
```makefile
# Rule 1
target: dependencies
  commands
  
# Rule 2, different syntax
target: dependencies ; commands
```
### Variables
- Variables are strings (`var := a b` means string "a b", `var := 'a b'` means string "'a b'")
- Undefined variable is an empty string 
- Define variable `var := value`
- Define variable, but the value is set only when it's used `var = value` ([example](https://makefiletutorial.com/#flavors-and-modification))
- Append to variable `var += value`
- Reference a variable `${varname}` or `$(varname)`
- Command-line arguments in `make VARNAME=value` are also variables, in Makefile you can access it with `${VARNAME}`
- To make a variable visible for child processes use `export` keyword.
### Other
- Make is language-independent. It executes arbitrary commands and resolves dependencies between targets.
- Running `make` without arguments will choose the first target. 
- `clean` and `all` targets are standard names, not keywords. 
- `.PHONY` - special target that marks other targets as not representing real files. Phony targets are always executed when requested.
- Commands echo by default, to suppress it use `.SILENT`:
```makefile
.SILENT: # no echoing for a whole makefile
.SILENT: target # no echoing for a specific target
target:
  @command # add @ to silent specific command
```
- If target's commands are on different lines, they are executed in different shells.
 
## Kbuild
- **Kbuild** - build system for Linux kernel, a set of Makefiles and scripts.
Starting point of Kbuild system is Makefile located in the root directory of the kernel build tree. For currently running kernel the path is ```/lib/modules/`uname -r`/build```.
- **Kbuild Makefiles** - Makefiles with predefined Kbuild variables/macros/flags for building your target. Name can be "Kbuild" or "Makefile" (Kbuild build system will search first for the name "Kbuild", then for "Makefile").  
### Definitions
- **in-tree** - kernel code is located in kernel source tree. Can be compiled as a dynamically loadable module or built into the kernel image.
- **out-of-tree** - kernel code is located in external directory and built separately from the kernel source tree.
- **built-in** - kernel code linked directly into the kernel image, always in-tree.  

|Concept|Meaning|
|-------|-------|
|in-tree/out-of-tree|source location|
|obj-m/obj-y|build type|
|module/built-in|runtime loading behavior|

### Make Usage
```make [flags] [command-line arguments] [targets]```

- **Flags** are regular Make flags.  
- **Command-line arguments** can be Kbuild environment variables or options. Options override corresponding environment variables.
- **Targets** - Make targets predefined by Kbuild.
#### Flags   
- **-C** *dir* - ```cd dir && make```. Used when building external modules to specify path to Kbuild.
- **-f** *file* - use *file* as a Makefile. Instead of going to the kbuild dir and search for a Makefile, this flag directly specifies Makefile that should be used.  

#### Environment Variables
From [documentation](https://docs.kernel.org/kbuild/kbuild.html#environment-variables)
- **KBUILD_VERBOSE** - enable verbose mode (1 - all, 2 - reason for rebuild the target)
- **KBUILD_EXTMOD** - set the directory to look for the kernel source when building external modules.
- **KBUILD_OUTPUT** - specify the output directory when building the kernel. This variable can also be used to point to the kernel output directory when building external modules against a pre-built kernel in a separate build directory. Please note that this does NOT specify the output directory for the external modules themselves. (Use KBUILD_EXTMOD_OUTPUT for that purpose.)
- **KBUILD_EXTMOD_OUTPUT** - specify the output directory for external modules.
- **ARCH** - build for a specific architecture. In most cases the name of the architecture is the same as the directory name found in the arch/ directory.
- **CROSS_COMPILE** - specify an optional fixed part of the binutils filename. Can be a part of the filename or the full path.

Full list of Kbuild environment variables see [here](https://docs.kernel.org/kbuild/kbuild.html#environment-variables).

#### Options
- **V** overrides KBUILD_VERBOSE
- **W** overrides [KBUILD_EXTRA_WARN](https://docs.kernel.org/kbuild/kbuild.html#kbuild-extra-warn)
- **O** overrides KBUILD_OUTPUT
- **M** overrides KBUILD_EXTMOD. Required for building external modules.
- **MO** overrides KBUILD_EXTMOD_OUTPUT. Optional.

#### Targets
- **help** - list the available targets.
- **modules** - build all modules, with option M - build all modules in an external dir.
- **modules_install** - install all modules, with option M - install only modules from the specified external module directory.
- **clean**

### Kbuild File
The main part of Kbuild file is **goals**. Goal is a predefined variable that represents how your code should be built (built-in, module, lib). Also Kbuild file may contain addition configurations like compilation flags and so on.
#### Goals
- **obj-y** - for built-in kernel code, becomes part of vmlinux 
- **obj-m** - for modules which can be loaded dynamically, ```obj-m += module-name.o```
- [**lib-y**](https://docs.kernel.org/kbuild/makefiles.html#library-file-goals-lib-y)
#### Variables
- **$(\<module_name\>-y)** - list of object files linked together into a composite module object.
- **ccflags-y** - specifies options for compiling with $(CC).
- **$(src)** is the directory where the Makefile is located. Always use $(src) when referring to files located in the src tree.

### Out-of-tree/External modules
From [Linux documentation](https://docs.kernel.org/kbuild/modules.html#command-syntax):  
>The command to build an external module is:  
```shell 
$ make -C <path_to_kernel_dir> M=$PWD
```  
>Starting from Linux 6.13, you can use the -f option instead of -C. This will avoid unnecessary change of the working directory. The external module will be output to the directory where you invoke make.  
```shell
$ make -f /lib/modules/`uname -r`/build/Makefile M=$PWD
```  

### Summary

|Build mode|Kbuild entry|Result|
|----------|------------|------|
|make M=$(PATH) + obj-m|out-of-tree|external loadable .ko|
|make + obj-m|	in-tree|in-tree loadable .ko|
|make + obj-y|	in-tree|built into vmlinux|
|make M=$(PATH) + obj-y||??|

## CMake
## ESP-IDF

### Useful links
- [makefiletutorial.com](https://makefiletutorial.com/)
- [Kbuild Makefiles](https://docs.kernel.org/kbuild/makefiles.html)
- [Building External Modules](https://docs.kernel.org/kbuild/modules.html)
- [Kbuild Environment Variables](https://docs.kernel.org/kbuild/kbuild.html#environment-variables)
- [In-Tree vs Out-Of-Tree](https://medium.com/@adityapatnaik27/linux-kernel-module-in-tree-vs-out-of-tree-build-77596fc35891)
